In this lesson we'll be kicking off the section by setting up a new project folder for the chat application.
We'll also take our first steps towards getting some code inside of there setting up a basic Web server
using Express which we'll be building off of.
Throughout this project.
So for the moment what we can do is close down the task manager directory and I can close all open files
and we'll be creating a new directorate in the node course folder.
I'll create the new folder and I can call it something like chat app.
Now this is the project we'll be working out of throughout this section and down below in the terminal
we're going to navigate into this project folder.
So down here in the terminal control C to shut down the test suite for the task manager.
C D dot dot to get out of that directory and once we're out of that directory I'll use C D chat app
to navigate into the new project folder.
I'll then use clear just to clear the terminal output.
And now we're starting from a nice clean slate over in the browser.
We could also go ahead and close some of the tabs we're no longer gonna be using.
I have this tab for the task manager repository.
I have some just documentation and the extra tests you can create.
We're not going to need any of those.
What we're going to do is start from scratch setting up as I mentioned a basic Express Web server.
Now from here let's go ahead and create a new directory in the chat app folder.
We're going to create the source directory for our node J.S. scripts and in that source directory for
now we're going to create just a single file index.
Dot J S now inside of here it's gonna be up to you to complete the following challenge.
The big picture goal here is to create an express server that serves up some HDMI L and this is something
we've already done before.
So I'm gonna have you do it this time as a challenge.
So we covered this previously in the course.
Right here you're going to do it once again.
So step number one you'll be initializing this chat app project to use NPM and you'll be installing
Express.
Next up in this file you're actually going to create the Express server what you want to do is create
a server that serves up the public directory.
Now currently no public directory exists in chat app.
You're gonna go ahead and fix that by creating it.
Then the server will start up and listen on port three thousand.
Now in that public folder you're going to create an HD email file called index down HDL and then you'll
render the text chat app to the screen.
And finally you'll test your work.
Start the new server and then view local host three thousand in the browser and ensure that you see
your little message showing up.
So take some time to knock this out and feel free to use any previous lesson in the course or any of
the code you already created as guidance for what you need to do.
All right.
Pause the video when you're done come back and click play
Oh right.
How that go.
Let's kick things off by initializing NPM and installing Express.
Now if you remember we can initialize NPM in a project by running NPM in it from the project route.
We don't have to provide any other arguments and it walks us through that little questionnaire we can
use the default value for everything and once we're done we simply confirm the contents of the package.
Jason File and it's created for us.
Now that we have package Jason in place we can move on to the second part of Step 1 which is to install
Express.
We'll do that from the terminal down below NPM ie.
That is expressed at version four point sixteen point four.
Right here I'm going to go ahead and install that version and once we have it installed we'll actually
set up the new express server right here in this file.
Now I'm gonna add all of the code for the file just above the challenge comments as I'll be removing
those challenge comments shortly.
And to kick off step 2 what you needed to do was load express in.
So right here const express equals we'll use require to load in the library.
Then down below we can actually create our new express application and get it configured and up and
running right here.
A new constant app we will get the value by calling the Express function to generate a new application.
Then we're going to go ahead and figure out how we can get the port as well as the public directory
path.
So right here let's start with port.
This will come from process done EMV dot port otherwise we'll fall back to the default value three thousand
which is what we'll be using locally on our machine.
Now maybe you didn't create a variable that checked for this if you did it.
That's OK but I would suggest doing a bit of refactoring to also check for that port environment variable.
Now I also wanted you to serve up the public directory which means we need to get the path to that folder
like we had done before in the web server project.
That means working with the node path module.
So right here const path equals.
I'll go ahead and use require to load in path.
And remember this is a core node module so there's no need to install it down below we can simply use
it right here.
Const public directory path.
Let's go ahead and spell things correctly equals and what we're gonna do is use path not join like we
had done earlier in the web server project.
We join together underscore underscore their name which is the current directory for this file and we
joined that with the following dot dot to get out of the source folder and forward slash public.
Now the public folder is not something that exists but we'll focus on fixing that in just a few moments.
So now we have everything we need to actually configure the server.
First up we're going to use the Express static middleware to serve up what's ever in this directory
right here.
That'll be app dot use.
Then we use Express dot static like we had done earlier in the class and we provide the path to the
folder that is the public directory path.
Now the last thing to do is to actually use app dot listen to start these server up.
I'm going to provide the port I want to listen on as that first argument and optionally I could choose
to provide a callback function.
You did not need to do this but if you did.
That's great as well right here.
Console dialogue and I'll use the S6 template string to print something like.
Server is up on Port followed by that port value right here referencing it and I'll put an exclamation
mark at the end.
So now we have our Express server up and running and it's serving up the contents of that public folder
that brings us to step three actually creating an HDMI all file we can serve up.
So let's go ahead and do just that in the chat app folder you needed to make the public directory and
in the public directory you needed to create a single file index dot HDL.
Now we'll be creating plenty of other files in the public directory throughout this project.
But for now just this one is gonna get the job done.
Now there was no need for anything specific or complex inside of here.
We're going to create a very barebones document starting off with our dock type which will be HDMI all.
Then we'll set up HDL inside of there we'll set up the head for our document and then down below we'll
also take a moment to set up the body and in the body we can put these stuff.
We want to render to the browser and for the moment the text chat app is all we want to show.
We're not even using any sort of header tag.
We're just typing the text right inside.
Now later on we'll add other things to configure this document but for now this is a great start.
And with this in place we're now ready to test our work.
So we completed step 3 we created that file and we hopefully will render the correct message to the
screen.
Now we can test our work.
So from the terminal down below what I'm gonna do is use clear to clear the terminal output and I will
use node source forward slash index dot J ust to start these server up and right here it says it's up
and running on port three thousand.
So over in the browser I'll go to local host on port three thousand to hopefully view our page and right
here what do we see.
We see our chat app message.
So with this in place we now have a basic express server which we can continue to build off of as we
build out the chat application for the moment.
What I'm going to do is remove those challenge comments and save the file and down below.
We'll be moving on to our second challenge for the lesson and we'll wrap up the lesson with this quick
one where you're going to need to set up some scripts in package Dot.
Jason the first thing you're going to do is create a start script which starts up the application using
Node much like we had just done from the terminal down below.
Then you're going to install node mom as a development dependency.
You'll be creating a second script a dev script which starts up the application with node on which we'll
be using as we build the app out locally.
Then number four you're gonna run both scripts to test your work so run them both and view things in
the browser making sure they're working as expected take some time to knock that out.
Test your work and when you're done come back and click play.
Let's go ahead and get to it over in package down.
Jason we'll be setting up both of these scripts.
Now I didn't tell you what to do with the test script so maybe you left it in place or maybe you removed
it.
Either way would be perfectly fine.
I'll go ahead and remove it and then we'll set up those two scripts.
I'm going to set up start to do the following.
It'll be using Node to run index dot J.S. in the source directory and we'll also go ahead and set up
the dev script even though we haven't installed node man just yet.
And right here we'll use node man to run that exact same file index dot J.S. in the source directory.
Now down below in the terminal we can actually install node man as a development dependency.
I need to use control C to shut things down followed by NPM I or install we're installing node on at
one point eighteen point seven and then we'll go ahead and use save dev to save that as a development
dependency because it's something we're only ever going to need when we're running the application locally
on our machines.
Now once this is installed the last thing we'll need to do is to test our work so I'll actually run
both scripts and make sure both are correctly serving up the little chat app HDMI I'll file down here
it has installed correctly and I'm seeing my changes in package.
Jason So what I'm going to do is remove the challenge comments I'll be saving index dot J asked and
I'll run both of those scripts NPM runs start to test out that start script it did indeed start and
if I refresh local host three thousand I can still see my application.
And next up we'll go ahead and run after using controls see NPM run dev to start it up using that development
script right here.
I can see that I have started the application using Node man and it should be up on port three thousand
over in the browser for one final time I'll give things a quick refresh and I am able to view the HDMI
L page which is fantastic.
So now that we have this in place we have a great starting point for the chat application in the next
lesson.
We're actually going to start to explore real time data transfer with node j s.
I'm super excited to get to that.
So let's go ahead and jump right in to the next lesson.